----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

                                                             
                   United States Strategic Approach to   
                        The People’s Republic of China  
                                                               

                                                              
                                               Introduction  
                                                              
Since  the  United  States  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  established  diplomatic  
relations in 1979, United States policy toward the PRC was largely premised on a hope that  
deepening engagement would spur fundamental economic and political opening in the PRC  
and lead to its emergence as a constructive and responsible global stakeholder, with a more  
open   society.      More   than   40   years   later,   it   has   become   evident   that   this   approach  
underestimated  the  will  of  the  Chinese  Communist  Party  (CCP)  to  constrain  the  scope  of  
economic and political reform in China.  Over the past two decades, reforms have slowed,  
stalled, or reversed.  The PRC’s rapid economic development and increased engagement with  
the world did not lead to convergence with the citizen-centric,  free and open order as the  
United States had hoped.  The CCP has chosen instead to exploit the free and open rules- 
based  order and attempt to reshape  the  international  system  in  its  favor.    Beijing  openly  
acknowledges that it seeks to transform the international order to align with CCP interests  
and ideology.  The CCP’s expanding use of economic, political, and military power to compel  
acquiescence  from  nation  states  harms  vital  American  interests  and  undermines  the  
sovereignty and dignity of countries and individuals around the world.   
  
To respond to Beijing’s challenge, the Administration has adopted a competitive approach to  
the PRC, based on a clear-eyed assessment of the CCP’s intentions and actions, a reappraisal  
of  the  United States’ many strategic advantages and shortfalls, and  a tolerance  of  greater  
bilateral friction.  Our approach is not premised on determining a particular end state for  
China.  Rather, our goal is to protect United States vital national interests, as articulated in  
the four pillars of the 2017 National Security Strategy of the United States of America  (NSS).   
We  aim  to:    (1) protect  the  American  people,  homeland,  and  way  of  life;  (2) promote  
American  prosperity;  (3)  preserve  peace  through  strength;  and  (4)  advance  American  
influence.   
  
Our competitive approach to the PRC has two objectives:  first, to improve the resiliency of  
our  institutions,  alliances,  and  partnerships  to  prevail  against  the  challenges  the  PRC  
presents;   and   second,   to   compel   Beijing   to   cease   or   reduce   actions   harmful   to  the  
United States’  vital,  national  interests  and  those  of  our  allies  and  partners.    Even  as  we  
compete with the PRC, we welcome cooperation where our interests align.  Competition need  
not lead to confrontation or conflict.  The United States has a deep and abiding respect for  
the Chinese people and enjoys longstanding ties to the country.  We do not seek to contain  
China’s  development, nor  do we  wish  to  disengage  from  the  Chinese  people.    The  United  
States  expects  to  engage  in  fair  competition  with  the  PRC,  whereby  both  of  our  nations,  
businesses, and individuals can enjoy security and prosperity.   
  
Prevailing  in  strategic  competition  with  the  PRC  requires  cooperative  engagement  with  
multiple  stakeholders,  and  the  Administration  is  committed  to  building  partnerships  to  

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

protect our shared interests and values.  Vital partners of this Administration include the  
Congress, state and local governments, the private sector, civil society, and academia.  The  
Congress has been speaking out through hearings, statements, and reports that shed light on  
the CCP’s malign behavior.  The Congress also provides legal authorities and resources for  
the United States Government to take the actions to achieve our strategic objectives.  The  
Administration  also  recognizes  the  steps  allies  and  partners  have  taken  to  develop  more  
clear-eyed   and   robust   approaches   toward   the   PRC,   including   the   European   Union’s  
publication in March 2019 of EU-China:  A Strategic Outlook, among others.  
  
The   United   States   is   also   building   cooperative   partnerships   and   developing   positive  
alternatives  with  foreign  allies,  partners,  and  international  organizations  to  support  the  
shared principles of a free and open order.  Specific to the Indo-Pacific region, many of these  
initiatives are described in  documents such as the Department of Defense June 2019 Indo- 
Pacific Strategy Report  and the Department of State November 2019 report on A Free and  
Open Indo-Pacific:  Advancing a Shared Vision.  The United States is working in concert with  
mutually aligned visions and approaches such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nation’s  
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific, Japan’s free and open Indo-Pacific vision, India’s Security and  
Growth for All in the Region policy, Australia’s Indo-Pacific concept, the Republic of Korea’s  
New Southern Policy, and Taiwan’s New Southbound Policy.   
  
This  report  does  not  attempt  to  detail  the  comprehensive  range  of  actions  and  policy  
initiatives  the  Administration  is  carrying  out  across  the  globe  as  part  of  our  strategic  
competition.  Rather, this report focuses on the implementation of the NSS as it applies most  
directly to the PRC.  
  

                                                   Challenges  
                                                                 
The PRC today poses numerous challenges to United States national interests.  
  
1.  Economic Challenges  
  
Beijing’s  poor  record  of  following  through  on  economic  reform  commitments  and  its  
extensive  use  of  state-driven  protectionist  policies  and  practices  harm  United  States  
companies and workers, distort global markets, violate international norms, and pollute the  
environment.    When  the  PRC  acceded  to  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO)  in  2001,  
Beijing  agreed  to  embrace  the  WTO’s  open  market-oriented  approach  and  embed  these  
principles in its trading system and institutions.  WTO members expected China to continue  
on its  path of economic reform  and transform itself into a market-oriented  economy and  
trade regime.   
  
These  hopes  were  not  realized.    Beijing  did  not  internalize  the  norms  and  practices  of  
competition-based   trade   and   investment,   and   instead   exploited  the   benefits   of   WTO  
membership  to  become  the  world’s  largest  exporter,  while  systematically  protecting  its  
domestic markets.  Beijing’s economic policies have led to massive industrial overcapacity  
that distorts global prices and allows China to expand global market share at the expense of  

                                                              2  

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

competitors operating without the unfair advantages that Beijing provides to its firms.  The  
PRC retains its non-market economic structure and state-led, mercantilist approach to trade  
and  investment.    Political  reforms  have  likewise  atrophied  and  gone  into  reverse,  and  
distinctions  between  the  government  and  the  party  are  eroding.    General  Secretary  Xi’s  
decision  to  remove  presidential  term  limits,  effectively  extending  his  tenure  indefinitely,  
epitomized these trends.  
  
In his 2018 Findings of the Investigation  into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to  
Technology Transfer, Intellectual Property, and Innovation under Section 301 of the Trade Act  
of  1974,  the  United  States  Trade  Representative  (USTR)  determined  that  numerous  acts,  
policies,  and  practices  of  the  PRC  government  were  unreasonable  or  discriminatory,  and  
burden or restrict United States commerce.  Based on a rigorous investigation, USTR found  
that the PRC:  (1) requires or pressures United States companies to transfer their technology  
to Chinese entities; (2) places substantial restrictions on United States companies’ ability to  
license their technology on market terms; (3) directs and unfairly facilitates acquisition of  
United States companies and assets by domestic firms to obtain cutting edge technologies;  
and (4) conducts and supports unauthorized cyber intrusions into United States companies’  
networks to access sensitive information and trade secrets.   
  
The list of Beijing’s commitments to cease its predatory economic practices is littered with  
broken  and  empty  promises.    In  2015,  Beijing  promised  that  it  would  stop  government- 
directed  cyber-enabled  theft  of  trade  secrets  for  commercial  gain,  reiterating  that  same  
promise in 2017 and 2018.  Later in  2018, the United States and a dozen other countries  
attributed   global   computer   intrusion   campaigns,   targeting   intellectual   property   and  
confidential  business information,  to  operators  affiliated  with  the  PRC’s  Ministry  of  State  
Security – a contravention of Beijing’s 2015 commitment.  Since the 1980s, Beijing has signed  
multiple international agreements to protect intellectual property.  Despite this, more than  
63 percent of the world’s counterfeits originate in China, inflicting hundreds of billions of  
dollars of damage on legitimate businesses around the world.   
  
While Beijing acknowledges that China is now a “mature economy,” the PRC continues to  
argue in its dealings with international bodies, including the WTO, that it is still a “developing  
country.”   Despite being the top importer of high technology products and ranking second  
only to the United States in terms of gross domestic product, defense spending, and outward  
investment, China self-designates as a developing country to justify policies and practices  
that  systematically  distort  multiple  sectors  globally,  harming  the  United  States  and  other  
countries.   
  
One  Belt  One  Road  (OBOR)  is  Beijing’s  umbrella  term  to  describe  a  variety  of  initiatives,  
many of which appear designed to reshape international norms, standards, and networks to  
advance Beijing’s global interests and vision, while also serving China’s domestic economic  
requirements.  Through OBOR and other initiatives, the PRC is expanding the use of Chinese  
industrial  standards  in  key  technology  sectors,  part  of  an  effort  to  strengthen  its  own  
companies’ position in the global marketplace at the expense of non-Chinese firms.  Projects  
that  Beijing  has  labeled  OBOR  include:    transportation,  information  and  communications  
technology  and  energy  infrastructure;  industrial  parks;  media  collaboration;  science  and  

                                                            3  

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

technology  exchanges;  programs  on  culture  and  religion;  and  even  military  and  security  
cooperation.  Beijing is also seeking to arbitrate OBOR-related commercial disputes through  
its   own   specialized   courts,   which   answer   to   the   CCP.     The   United   States   welcomes  
contributions       by    China     to  sustainable,       high-quality      development         that   accords      with  
international  best  practices,  but  OBOR  projects  frequently  operate  well  outside  of  these  
standards and are characterized by poor quality, corruption, environmental degradation, a  
lack of public oversight or community involvement, opaque loans, and contracts generating  
or exacerbating governance and fiscal problems in host nations.   
  
Given Beijing’s increasing use of economic leverage to extract political concessions from or  
exact retribution against other countries, the United States judges that Beijing will attempt  
to convert OBOR projects into undue political influence and military access.  Beijing uses a  
combination of threat and inducement to pressure governments, elites, corporations, think  
tanks,  and  others  –  often  in  an  opaque  manner  –  to  toe  the  CCP  line  and  censor  free  
expression.  Beijing has restricted trade and tourism with Australia, Canada, South Korea,  
Japan, Norway, the Philippines, and others, and has detained Canadian citizens, in an effort  
to interfere in these countries’ internal political and judicial processes.  After the Dalai Lama  
visited   Mongolia   in   2016,   the   PRC   government   imposed   new   tariffs   on   land-locked  
Mongolia’s  mineral  exports  passing  through  China,  temporarily  paralyzing  Mongolia’s  
economy.   
  
Beijing seeks global recognition for its environmental efforts and claims to promote “green  
development.”  China, however, has been the world’s largest greenhouse gas emitter by a  
wide  margin  for  more  than  a  decade.    Beijing  has  put  forward  vague  and  unenforceable  
emissions  reduction  commitments  that  allow  China’s  emissions  to  keep  growing  until  
“around 2030.”  China’s planned growing emissions will outweigh the reductions from the  
rest of the world combined.  Chinese firms also export polluting coal-fired power plants to  
developing countries by the hundreds.  The PRC is also the world’s largest source of marine  
plastic pollution, discharging over 3.5 million metric tons into the ocean each year.  The PRC  
ranks first in the world for illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing in coastal nations’  
waters around the world, threatening local economies and harming the marine environment.   
Chinese leaders’ unwillingness to rein in these globally harmful practices does not match  
their rhetorical promises of environmental stewardship.   
  
2.  Challenges to Our Values   
  
The CCP promotes globally a value proposition that challenges the bedrock American belief  
in the unalienable right of every person to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.  Under  
the  current  generation  of  leadership,  the  CCP  has  accelerated  its  efforts  to  portray  its  
governance  system  as  functioning  better  than  those  of  what  it  refers  to  as  “developed,  
western countries.”  Beijing is clear that it sees itself as engaged in an ideological competition  
with the West.  In 2013, General Secretary Xi called on the CCP to prepare for a “long-term  
period  of  cooperation  and  conflict”  between  two  competing  systems  and  declared  that  
“capitalism is bound to die out and socialism is bound to win.”   
  

                                                             4  

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

The CCP aims to make China a “global leader in terms of comprehensive national power and  
international influence,” as General Secretary Xi expressed in 2017, by strengthening what  
it refers to as “the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics.”  This system is rooted  
in Beijing’s interpretation of Marxist-Leninist ideology and combines a nationalistic, single- 
party dictatorship; a state-directed economy; deployment of science and technology in the  
service of the state; and the subordination of individual rights to serve CCP ends.  This runs  
counter  to  principles  shared  by  the  United States  and  many  likeminded  countries  of  
representative  government,  free  enterprise,  and  the  inherent  dignity  and  worth  of  every  
individual.  
   
Internationally, the CCP promotes General Secretary Xi’s vision for global governance under  
the banner of “building a community of common destiny for mankind.”  Beijing’s efforts to  
compel ideological conformity at home,  however,  present  an  unsettling  picture  of  what  a  
CCP-led “community” looks like in practice:  (1) an anticorruption campaign that has purged  
political    opposition;       (2)    unjust     prosecutions        of   bloggers,     activists,     and    lawyers;  
(3) algorithmically  determined  arrests  of  ethnic  and  religious  minorities;  (4)  stringent  
controls     over     and    censorship       of   information,       media,     universities,     businesses,       and   
non-governmental  organizations;  (5) surveillance   and  social  credit  scoring  of  citizens,  
corporations,  and  organizations;  and  (6) and  arbitrary  detention,  torture,  and  abuse  of  
people perceived to be dissidents.  In a stark example of domestic conformity, local officials  
publicized  a  book  burning  event  at  a  community  library  to  demonstrate  their  ideological  
alignment to “Xi Jinping Thought.”  
  
One disastrous outgrowth of such an approach to governance is Beijing’s policies in Xinjiang,  
where since  2017, authorities have detained more than a million Uighurs and members of  
other  ethnic  and  religious  minority  groups  in  indoctrination  camps,  where  many  endure  
forced labor, ideological indoctrination, and physical and psychological abuse.  Outside these  
camps,  the  regime  has instituted  a  police  state  employing  emerging  technologies  such  as  
artificial  intelligence  and  biogenetics  to  monitor  ethnic  minorities’  activities  to  ensure  
allegiance to the CCP.  Widespread religious persecution –  of Christians, Tibetan Buddhists,  
Muslims, and members of Falun Gong – includes the demolition and desecration of places of  
worship,  arrests  of  peaceful  believers,  forced  renunciations  of  faith,  and  prohibitions  on  
raising children in traditions of faith.  
   
The CCP’s campaign to compel ideological conformity does not stop at China’s borders.  In  
recent years, Beijing has intervened in sovereign nations’ internal affairs to engineer consent  
for its policies.  PRC authorities have attempted to extend CCP influence over discourse and  
behavior around the world, with recent examples including companies and sports teams in  
the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  politicians  in  Australia  and  Europe.    PRC  
actors are exporting the tools of the CCP’s techno-authoritarian model to countries around  
the  world,  enabling  authoritarian  states  to  exert  control  over  their  citizens  and  surveil  
opposition, training foreign partners in propaganda and censorship techniques, and using  
bulk data collection to shape public sentiment.   
  
China’s  party-state  controls  the  world’s  most  heavily  resourced  set  of  propaganda  tools.   
Beijing  communicates  its  narrative  through  state-run  television,  print,  radio,  and  online  

                                                            5  

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

organizations  whose  presence  is  proliferating  in  the  United States  and  around  the  world.   
The  CCP  often  conceals  its  investments  in  foreign  media  entities.    In  2015,  China  Radio  
International was revealed to control 33 radio stations in 14 countries via shell entities, and  
to subsidize multiple intermediaries through providing free, pro-Beijing content.   
  
Beyond the media, the CCP uses a range of actors to advance its interests in the United States  
and other open democracies.  CCP United Front organizations and agents target businesses,  
universities, think tanks, scholars,  journalists, and  local,  state, and Federal officials  in the  
United States and around the world, attempting to influence discourse and restrict external  
influence inside the PRC.   
    
Beijing regularly attempts to compel or persuade Chinese nationals and others to undertake  
a range of malign behaviors that threaten United States national and economic security, and  
undermine   academic   freedom   and   the   integrity   of   the   United   States   research   and  
development  enterprise.    These  behaviors  include  misappropriation  of  technology  and  
intellectual      property,       failure     to   appropriately         disclose      relationships        with     foreign  
government sponsored entities, breaches of contract and confidentiality, and manipulation  
of  processes  for  fair  and  merit-based  allocation  of  Federal  research  and  development  
funding.  Beijing also attempts to compel Chinese nationals to report on and threaten fellow  
Chinese students, protest against events that run counter to Beijing’s political narrative, and  
otherwise restrict the academic freedom that is the hallmark and strength of the American  
education system.   
  
PRC  media  entities,  journalists,  academics,  and  diplomats  are  free  to  operate  in  the  
United States, but Beijing denies reciprocal access to American counterpart institutions and  
officials.      The   PRC   government   routinely   denies   United States   officials,   including   the  
United States  Ambassador  to  the  PRC,  access  to  Department  of  State-funded  American  
Cultural Centers, which are hosted in Chinese universities to share American culture with  
the  Chinese  people.    Foreign  reporters  working  in  the  PRC  often  face  harassment  and  
intimidation.   
  
3.  Security Challenges  
  
As China has grown in strength, so has the willingness and capacity of the CCP to employ  
intimidation and coercion in its attempts to eliminate perceived threats to its interests and  
advance       its   strategic     objectives      globally.        Beijing’s     actions     belie    Chinese       leaders’  
proclamations that they oppose the threat or use of force, do not intervene in other countries’  
internal affairs, or are committed to resolving disputes through peaceful dialogue.  Beijing  
contradicts   its   rhetoric   and   flouts   its   commitments   to   its   neighbors   by   engaging   in  
provocative and coercive military and paramilitary activities in the Yellow Sea, the East and  
South China Seas, the Taiwan Strait, and Sino-Indian border areas.  
  
In May 2019, the Department of Defense issued its annual report to the Congress, Military  
and  Security  Developments  Involving  the  PRC,  assessing  current  and  future  trajectories  of  
China’s  military-technological  development,  security  and  military  strategies,  and  People’s  
Liberation  Army  (PLA)  organizational  and  operational  concepts.    In  July  2019,  the  PRC  

                                                               6  

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

Minister  of  Defense  publicly  acknowledged  that  OBOR  is  linked  to  the  PRC’s  aspirational  
expansion of PLA presence overseas, including locations such as the Pacific Islands and the  
Caribbean.    
   
Beijing’s military buildup threatens United States and allied national security interests and  
poses complex challenges for global commerce and supply chains.  Beijing’s Military-Civil  
Fusion  (MCF)  strategy  gives  the  PLA  unfettered  access  into  civil  entities  developing  and  
acquiring advanced technologies, including state-owned and private firms, universities, and  
research programs.  Through non-transparent MCF linkages, United States and other foreign  
companies  are  unwittingly  feeding  dual-use  technologies  into  PRC  military  research  and  
development  programs,  strengthening  the  CCP’s  coercive  ability  to  suppress  domestic  
opposition and threaten foreign countries, including United States allies and partners.   
  
The  PRC’s  attempts  to  dominate  the  global  information  and  communications  technology  
industry  through  unfair  practices  is  reflected  in  discriminatory  regulations  like  the  PRC  
National  Cyber  Security  Law,  which  requires  companies  to  comply  with  Chinese  data  
localization  measures  that  enable  CCP  access  to  foreign  data.    Other  PRC  laws  compel  
companies like Huawei and ZTE to cooperate with Chinese security services, even when they  
do business abroad, creating security vulnerabilities for foreign countries and enterprises  
utilizing Chinese vendors’ equipment and services.   
  
Beijing refuses to honor its commitment to provide travel documents for Chinese citizens  
with orders of removal from the United States in a timely and consistent manner, effectively  
blocking   their   removals   from   our   country   and   creating   security   risks   for   American  
communities.    In  addition,  the  PRC’s  violations  of  our  bilateral  consular  treaty  puts  
United States citizens at risk in China, with many Americans detrimentally affected by the  
PRC government’s coercive exit bans and wrongful detentions.  
  
                                                   Approach  
  
The  NSS  demands  that  the  United  States  “rethink  the  policies  of  the  past  two  decades  –  
policies  based  on  the  assumption  that  engagement  with  rivals  and  their  inclusion  in  
international  institutions  and  global  commerce  would  turn  them  into  benign  actors  and  
trustworthy partners.  For the most part, this premise turned out to be false.  Rival actors use  
propaganda  and  other  means  to  try  to  discredit  democracy.    They  advance  anti-Western  
views and spread false information to create divisions among ourselves, our allies, and our  
partners.”  
  
Guided by a return to principled realism, the United States is responding to the CCP’s direct  
challenge  by  acknowledging  that  we  are  in  a  strategic  competition  and  protecting  our  
interests  appropriately.    The  principles  of  the  United  States’  approach  to   China  are  
articulated both in the NSS and our vision for the Indo-Pacific region – sovereignty, freedom,  
openness,  rule  of  law,  fairness,  and  reciprocity.    United States-China  relations  do  not  
determine our Indo-Pacific strategy, but rather fall within that strategy and the overarching  

                                                             7  

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

NSS.  By the same token, our vision of a free and open Indo-Pacific region does not exclude  
China.  
  
The United States holds the PRC government to the same standards and principles that apply  
to all nations.  We believe this is the treatment that the people of China want and deserve  
from  their  own  government  and  from  the  international  community.    Given  the  strategic  
choices China’s leadership is making, the United States now acknowledges and accepts the  
relationship with the PRC as the CCP has always framed it internally:  one of great power  
competition.   
  
United  States  policies  are  not  premised  on  an  attempt  to  change  the  PRC’s  domestic  
governance model, nor do they make concessions to the CCP’s narratives of exceptionalism  
and  victimhood.    Rather,  United States  policies  are  designed  to  protect  our  interests  and  
empower  our  institutions  to  withstand  the  CCP’s  malign  behavior  and  collateral  damage  
from the PRC’s internal governance problems.  Whether the PRC eventually converges with  
the  principles  of  the  free  and  open  order  can  only  be  determined  by  the  Chinese  people  
themselves.  We recognize that Beijing, not Washington, has agency over and responsibility  
for the PRC government’s actions.  
  
The United States rejects CCP attempts at false equivalency between rule-of-law and rule- 
by-law; between counterterrorism and oppression; between representative governance and  
autocracy;  and  between  market-based  competition  and  state-directed  mercantilism.    The  
United States  will  continue  to  challenge  Beijing’s  propaganda  and  false  narratives  that  
distort the truth and attempt to demean American values and ideals.   
  
Similarly, the United States does not and will not accommodate Beijing’s actions that weaken  
a  free,  open,  and  rules-based  international  order.    We  will  continue  to  refute  the  CCP’s  
narrative that the United States is in strategic retreat or will shirk our international security  
commitments.    The  United States  will  work  with  our  robust  network  of  allies  and  like- 
minded  partners  to  resist  attacks  on  our  shared  norms  and  values,  within  our  own  
governance institutions, around the world, and in international organizations.  
  
The  American  people’s  generous  contributions  to  China’s  development  are  a  matter  of  
historical record –  just as the Chinese people’s remarkable accomplishments in the era of  
Reform and Opening are undeniable.  However, the negative trend lines of Beijing’s policies  
and practices threaten the legacy of the Chinese people and their future position in the world.   
  
Beijing  has  repeatedly  demonstrated  that  it  does  not  offer  compromises  in  response  to  
American  displays  of   goodwill,  and  that  its  actions  are  not  constrained  by  its  prior  
commitments  to  respect  our  interests.    As  such,  the  United  States  responds  to  the  PRC’s  
actions rather than its stated commitments.  Moreover, we do not cater to Beijing’s demands  
to create a proper “atmosphere” or “conditions” for dialogue.   
  
Likewise,  the  United  States  sees  no  value  in  engaging  with  Beijing  for  symbolism  and  
pageantry; we instead demand tangible results and constructive outcomes.  We acknowledge  
and respond in kind to Beijing’s transactional approach with timely incentives and costs, or  

                                                               8  

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

credible threats thereof.  When quiet diplomacy proves futile, the United States will increase  
public pressure on the PRC government and take action to protect United States interests by  
leveraging proportional costs when necessary.  
  
The PRC government has fallen short of its commitments in many areas including:  trade and  
investment; freedoms of expression and belief; political interference; freedoms of navigation  
and  overflight;  cyber  and  other  types  of  espionage  and  theft;  weapons  proliferation;  
environmental  protection;   and  global  health.    Agreements  with  Beijing  must  include  
stringent verification and enforcement mechanisms.  
  
We speak candidly with the Chinese people and expect honesty from PRC leaders.  In matters  
of  diplomacy,  the  United States  responds  appropriately  to  the  CCP’s  insincere  or  vague  
threats,  and  stands  up  alongside  our  allies  and  partners  to  resist  coercion.    Through  our  
continuous  and  frank  engagement,  the  United  States  welcomes  cooperation  by  China  to  
expand  and  work  toward  shared  objectives  in  ways  that  benefit  the  peace,  stability,  and  
prosperity of the world.  Our approach does not exclude the PRC.  The United States stands  
ready to welcome China’s positive contributions.  
  
As the above tenets of our approach  imply, competition necessarily includes  engagement  
with the PRC, but our engagements are selective and results-oriented, with each advancing  
our national interests.  We engage with the PRC to negotiate and enforce commitments to  
ensure fairness and reciprocity; clarify Beijing’s intentions to avoid misunderstanding; and  
resolve disputes to prevent escalation.  The United States is committed to maintaining open  
channels of communication with the PRC to reduce risks and manage crises.  We expect the  
PRC to also keep these channels open and responsive.  
  
                                             Implementation  
                                                                
In accordance with the President’s NSS, the political, economic, and security policies outlined  
in  this  report  seek  to  protect  the  American  people  and  homeland,  promote  American  
prosperity,  preserve peace through strength, and  advance  a  free  and  open  vision  abroad.   
During the first 3 years of the Administration, the United States has taken significant steps  
in implementing this strategy as it applies to China.  
  
1.  Protect the American People, the Homeland, and the American Way of Life  
  
The  United  States  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ)’s  China  Initiative  and  Federal  Bureau  of  
Investigation are directing resources to identify and prosecute trade secrets theft, hacking,  
and economic espionage; and increasing efforts to protect against malign foreign investment  
in United States infrastructure, supply chain threats, and foreign agents seeking to influence  
American policy.  For example, DOJ informed PRC state media company CGTN-America of its  
obligation to register as a foreign agent as specified under the Foreign Agents Registration  
Act (FARA), which obligates registrants to disclose their activities to Federal authorities and  

                                                             9  

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

appropriately  label  information  materials  they  distribute.    CGTN-America  subsequently  
registered under FARA.  
  
The   Administration   is   also   responding   to   CCP   propaganda   in   the   United   States   by  
highlighting  malign  behavior,  countering  false  narratives,  and  compelling  transparency.   
United States officials, including those from the White House and the Departments of State,  
Defense,  and  Justice,  are  leading  efforts  to  educate  the  American  public  about  the  PRC  
government’s  exploitation  of  our  free  and  open  society  to  push  a  CCP  agenda  inimical  to  
United  States  interests  and  values.    In  an   effort  to  achieve  reciprocity  of  access,  the  
Department  of  State  has  implemented  a  policy  requiring  Chinese  diplomats  to  notify  the  
United  States  Government  before  meeting  with  state  and  local  government  officials  and  
academic institutions.  
  
The Administration is raising awareness of and actively combatting Beijing’s co-optation and  
coercion  of  its  own  citizens  and  others  in  United  States  academic  institutions,  beyond  
traditional espionage and influence efforts.  We are working with universities to protect the  
rights  of  Chinese  students  on  American  campuses,  provide  information  to  counter  CCP  
propaganda and disinformation, and ensure an understanding of ethical codes of conduct in  
an American academic environment.   
  
Chinese students represent the largest cohort of foreign students in the United States today.   
The United States values the contributions of Chinese students and researchers.  As of 2019,  
the number of Chinese students and researchers in the United States has reached an all-time  
high, while the number of student visa denials to Chinese applicants has steadily declined.   
The   United States   strongly   supports   the   principles   of   open   academic   discourse   and  
welcomes international students and researchers conducting legitimate academic pursuits;  
we  are  improving  processes  to  screen  out  the  small  minority  of  Chinese  applicants  who  
attempt to enter the United States under false pretenses or with malign intent.  
  
In the United States research community, Federal agencies such as the National Institutes of  
Health and the Department of Energy have updated or clarified regulations and procedures  
to  ensure  compliance  with  applicable  standards  of  conduct  and  reporting,  in  order  to  
improve   transparency   and   prevent   conflicts   of   interest.      The   National   Science   and  
Technology Council’s Joint Committee on the Research Environment is developing standards  
for Federally-funded research, and best practices for United States research institutions.  The  
Department of Defense is working to ensure grantees do not also have contracts with China’s  
talent recruitment programs, while also continuing to welcome foreign researchers.    
  
To prevent foreign malign actors from gaining access to United States information networks,  
the President issued the “Executive Order on Securing the Information and Communications  
Technology  and  Services  Supply  Chain”  and  the  “Executive  Order  on  Establishing  the  
Committee         for    the    Assessment         of   Foreign      Participation        in   the     United      States  
Telecommunications Services Sector.”  The implementation of these Executive Orders will  
prevent  certain  companies  associated  with  or  answering  to  the  intelligence  and  security  
apparatus  of  foreign  adversaries  from,  for  example,  readily  accessing  the  private  and  
sensitive information of the United States Government, the United States private sector, and  

                                                            10  

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

individual  Americans.    To  ensure  protection  of  our  information  worldwide,  including  
sensitive military and intelligence data, the United States is actively engaging with our allies  
and partners, including in multilateral fora, to promote a set of common standards for secure,  
resilient,  and  trusted  communications  platforms  that  underpin  the  global  information  
economy.    To  compel  Beijing  to  adhere  to  norms  of  responsible  state  behavior,  the  
United States  is  working  with  allies  and  like-minded  partners  to  attribute  and  otherwise  
deter malicious cyber activities.   
  
The Administration is implementing the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act  
to  update  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Committee  on  Foreign  Investment  in  the  
United States        (CFIUS)      to   address       growing      national      security      concerns       over    foreign  
exploitation of investment structures, which previously fell outside CFIUS jurisdiction.  This  
includes preventing Chinese companies from exploiting access to United States innovation  
through minority investments in order to modernize the Chinese military.  The United States  
has updated its export control regulations, particularly in light of Beijing’s whole-of-society  
MCF  strategy  and  its  efforts  to  acquire  advanced  technologies  related  to  hypersonics,  
quantum        computing,        artificial    intelligence,      biotechnology,         and     other    emerging        and  
foundational technologies.  We are also engaging allies and partners to develop their own  
foreign  investment  screening  mechanisms,  and  to  update  and  implement  export  controls  
collaboratively through multilateral regimes and other forums.  
  
The  United  States  Government  is  also  taking  concrete  actions  to  protect  the  American  
consumer  from  counterfeit  and  substandard  products.    Between  2017  and  2018,  the  
United States  Department  of  Homeland  Security  seized  more  than  59,000  shipments  of  
counterfeit goods, produced in the PRC, valued at more than $2.1 billion.  This represents  
five times the total shipments and value seized from all other foreign countries combined.  
  
In  addition  to  falsely  branded  apparel,  footwear,  handbags,  and  watches,  United  States  
Customs  and  Border  Protection  intercepted  three  shipments  containing  53,000  illegal  
Chinese gun parts and electronics that could have compromised the security and privacy of  
American  businesses  and  consumers.    United  States  law  enforcement  agencies  are  also  
targeting  counterfeit  pharmaceuticals  and  cosmetics  originating  from  China,  which  have  
been found to contain high levels of contaminants, including bacteria and animal waste that  
pose a danger to American consumers.  
  
The  United  States  is  working  with  Chinese  authorities  to  stem  the  deadly  flow  of  illicit  
Chinese fentanyl from the PRC to the United States.  In December 2018, the President secured  
a commitment from his Chinese counterpart to control all forms of fentanyl in the PRC.  With  
the  Chinese  regulatory  regime  in  place  since  May  2019,  United  States  and  PRC  law  
enforcement  agencies  are  sharing  intelligence  and  coordinating  to  set  conditions  for  
enforcement   actions   that   will            deter   Chinese   drug   producers              and    traffickers.        The  
United States  is  also  working  with  China’s  postal  agencies  to  improve  tracking  of  small  
parcels for law enforcement purposes.  
  
  
  

                                                              11  

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

2.  Promote American Prosperity  
  
In  response  to  the  PRC’s  documented  unfair  and  abusive  trade  practices  and  industrial  
policies,   the  Administration  is  taking   strong  actions   to  protect  American  businesses,  
workers, and  farmers,  and to put  an  end  to  Beijing’s  practices  that  have  contributed  to  a  
hollowing-out of the United States manufacturing base.  The United States is committed to  
rebalancing  the  United States-China  economic  relationship.    Our  whole-of-government  
approach   supports   fair   trade   and   advances   United   States   competitiveness,   promotes  
United States   exports,   and   breaks   down   unjust   barriers   to   United   States   trade   and  
investment.    Having  failed  since  2003  to  persuade  Beijing  to  adhere  to  its  economic  
commitments through regular, high-level dialogues, the United States is confronting China’s  
market-distorting         forced    technology       transfer     and    intellectual     property     practices     by  
imposing costs in the form of tariffs levied on Chinese goods coming into the United States.   
Those tariffs will remain in place until a fair Phase Two trade deal is agreed to by the United  
States and the PRC.  
  
In  response  to  Beijing’s  repeated  failure  to  reduce  or  eliminate  its  market-distorting  
subsidies  and  overcapacity,  the  United States  imposed  tariffs  to  protect  our  strategically  
important steel and aluminum industries.  For those unfair Chinese trade practices that are  
subject to dispute settlement at the WTO,  the  United  States  continues  to  pursue  and  win  
multiple  cases.    Finally,  to  crack  down  on  China’s  dumping  and  subsidies  across  a  broad  
range of industries, the Department of Commerce is making greater utility of United States  
antidumping and countervailing duties laws than in past administrations.  
  
In January 2020, the United States and the PRC signed Phase One of an economic and trade  
agreement that requires structural reforms and other changes to China’s economic and trade  
regime, addressing several longstanding United States concerns.  The agreement prohibits  
the  PRC  from  forcing  or  pressuring  foreign  companies  to  transfer  their  technology  as  a  
condition   for   doing       business   in   China;   strengthens   protection   and   enforcement                   of  
intellectual property in China in all key areas; creates new market opportunities in China for  
United States agriculture and financial services by addressing policy barriers; and addresses  
longstanding, unfair currency practices.    The  agreement  also  establishes  a  strong  dispute  
resolution mechanism that ensures prompt and effective implementation and enforcement.   
By addressing structural barriers to trade and making the commitments fully enforceable,  
the  Phase  One  agreement  will  expand  United  States  exports  to  China.    As  part  of  this  
agreement, the PRC committed over the next 2 years to increase imports of United States  
goods  and  services  by  no  less  than  $200 billion  in  four  broad  categories:    manufactured  
goods, agriculture, energy, and services.  This agreement marks critical progress toward a  
more balanced trade relationship and a more level playing field for American workers and  
companies.  
  
Domestically, the Administration is taking steps to strengthen the United States economy  
and promote economic sectors of the future, such as 5G technology, through tax reforms and  
a robust deregulatory agenda.  The President’s “Executive Order on Maintaining American  
Leadership in Artificial Intelligence” is an example of a United States Government initiative  

                                                           12  

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

to promote investment and collaboration to ensure the United States continues to lead in  
innovation and setting standards for a growing industry.  
  
Together  with  other  likeminded  nations,  the  United States  promotes  an  economic  vision  
based on principles of sovereignty, free markets, and sustainable development.  Alongside  
the European Union and Japan, the United States is engaged in a robust trilateral process to  
develop disciplines for state-owned enterprises, industrial subsidies, and forced technology  
transfers.    We  will  also  continue  to  work  with  our  allies  and  partners  to  ensure  that  
discriminatory industrial standards do not become global standards.  As the world’s most  
valuable   consumer   market,   largest   source   of   foreign   direct   investment,   and   leading  
wellspring  of  global  technological  innovation,  the  United States  engages  extensively  with  
allies  and  partners  to  evaluate  shared  challenges  and  coordinate  effective  responses  to  
ensure continued peace and prosperity.  We work closely with United States companies to  
build their competitiveness at home and abroad while fostering sustainable development  
through programs such as Prosper Africa, America Crece in Latin America and the Caribbean,  
and Enhancing Development and Growth through Energy in the Indo-Pacific region.  
  
3.  Preserve Peace through Strength  
  
The 2018 National Defense Strategy (NDS) prioritizes long-term competition with China and  
emphasizes         modernization         and     partnerships        to   counter       the    PLA’s     technological  
advancements, force development, and growing international presence and assertiveness.   
As   described   in   the   Nuclear   Posture   Review,   the   Administration   is   prioritizing   the  
modernization of the nuclear triad, including the development of supplementary capabilities  
designed to deter Beijing from using its weapons of mass destruction or conducting other  
strategic attacks.  Meanwhile, the United States continues to urge China’s leaders to come to  
the table and begin arms control and strategic risk reduction discussions as a nuclear power  
with   a   modern   and   growing   nuclear   arsenal   and   the   world’s   largest   collection   of  
intermediate range delivery systems.  The United States believes it is in the interest of all  
nations to improve Beijing’s transparency, prevent miscalculations, and avoid costly arms  
buildups.  
  
The Department of Defense  is moving  quickly  to  deploy  hypersonic  platforms,  increasing  
investments  in  cyber  and  space  capabilities,  and  developing  more  lethal  fires  based  on  
resilient, adaptive, and cost-effective platforms.  Together, these capabilities are intended to  
deter  and  counter  Beijing’s  growing  ambitions  and  the  PLA’s  drive  toward  technological  
parity and superiority.  
  
As part of our worldwide freedom of navigation operations program, the United States is  
pushing  back  on  Beijing’s  hegemonic  assertions  and  excessive  claims.    The  United States  
military will continue to exercise the right to navigate and operate wherever international  
law  allows,  including  in  the  South  China  Sea.    We  are  speaking  up  for  regional  allies  and  
partners, and providing security assistance to help them build capacity to withstand Beijing’s  
attempts to use its military, paramilitary, and law enforcement forces to coerce and prevail  
in  disputes.    In  2018,  the  United  States  military  withdrew  the  invitation  for  the  PLA  to  

                                                            13  

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

participate  in  the  biennial  Rim  of  the  Pacific  exercise  due  to  Beijing’s  deployment  of  
advanced missile systems onto manmade features in the South China Sea.   
  
Stronger  alliances  and  partnerships  are  a  cornerstone  of  the  NDS.    The  United  States  is  
building  partner  capacity  and  deepening  interoperability  to  develop  a  combat-credible  
forward operating presence, fully integrated with allies and partners to deter and deny PRC  
aggression.    The  Administration’s  Conventional  Arms  Transfer  policy  aims  to  promote  
United States arms sales and accelerate the transformation of partner military capabilities  
in a strategic and complementary manner.  In June 2019, the Department of Defense released  
its  first  Indo-Pacific  Strategy  Report,  articulating  the  Department’s  implementation  of  the  
NDS and our whole-of-government strategy for the Indo-Pacific region.   
  
The  United  States  will  continue  to  maintain  strong  unofficial  relations  with  Taiwan  in  
accordance  with  our  “One  China”  policy,  based  on  the  Taiwan  Relations  Act  and  the  
three United States-PRC   Joint   Communiques.      The   United   States   maintains   that   any  
resolution of cross-Strait differences must be peaceful and according to the will of the people  
on  both  sides,  without  resorting  to  threat  or  coercion.    Beijing’s  failure  to  honor  its  
commitments  under  the  communiques,  as  demonstrated  by  its  massive  military  buildup,  
compels the United States to continue to assist the Taiwan military in maintaining a credible  
self-defense, which deters aggression and helps to ensure peace and stability in the region.   
In a 1982 memorandum, President Ronald Reagan insisted “that the quantity and quality of  
the arms provided Taiwan be conditioned entirely on the threat posed by the PRC.”  In 2019,  
the United States approved more than $10 billion of arms sales to Taiwan.  
  
The  United  States  remains  committed  to  maintaining  a  constructive,  results-oriented  
relationship with the PRC.  The United States conducts defense contacts and exchanges with  
the  PRC  to  communicate  strategic  intent;  prevent  and  manage  crises;  reduce  the  risks  of  
miscalculation  and  misunderstanding  that  could  escalate  into  conflict;  and  cooperate  in  
areas of shared interest.  The United States military engages with the PLA to develop effective  
crisis  communication  mechanisms,  including  responsive  channels  for  de-escalation  in  
unplanned scenarios.  
  
4.  Advance American Influence  
  
For the past seven decades, the free and open international order has provided the stability  
to allow sovereign, independent states to flourish and contribute to unprecedented global  
economic growth.  As a large, developed country and a major beneficiary of this order, the  
PRC should help guarantee freedom and openness for other nations around the globe.  When  
Beijing instead promotes or abets authoritarianism, self-censorship, corruption, mercantilist  
economics,   and   intolerance   of   ethnic   and   religious   diversity,   the   United States   leads  
international efforts to resist and counter these malign activities.   
  
In 2018 and 2019, the Secretary of State hosted the first two gatherings of the Ministerial to  
Advance Religious Freedom.  Along with the President’s unprecedented Global Call to Protect  
Religious Freedom during the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in September 2019,  
these  events brought together global  leaders  to  address  religious  persecution  around  the  

                                                             14  

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

world.    During  both  ministerials,  the  United States  and  partner  countries  released  joint  
statements calling on the PRC government to respect the rights of Uighur and other Turkic  
Muslims,  Tibetan  Buddhists,  Christians,  and  Falun  Gong  adherents,  all  of  whom  face  
repression and persecution in China.  In February 2020, the  Department of State launched  
the  first  ever  International  Religious  Freedom  Alliance  with  25  likeminded  partners  to  
defend the right of every person to worship without fear.  The President met with Chinese  
dissidents and survivors  on the margins  of  the  2019 Ministerial, and he shared  the stage  
during  UNGA  with  victims  of  religious  persecution  from  China.    The  United States  also  
continues to support human rights defenders and independent civil society working in or on  
China.  
  
In  October  2019  at  the  United  Nations  in  New  York,  the  United States  joined  likeminded  
nations  in  condemning  Beijing’s  ongoing  human  rights  violations  and  other  repressive  
policies in Xinjiang that threaten international peace and security.  The latter event followed  
United States       Government         actions     to   stop    United States       exports     to   select    Chinese  
government  agencies  and  surveillance  technology  companies  complicit  in  the  Xinjiang  
human rights abuses and to deny United States visas for Chinese officials, and their family  
members, responsible for violating Beijing’s international human rights commitments.  The  
United States  has  also  begun  actions  to  block  imports  of  Chinese  goods  produced  using  
forced labor in Xinjiang.   
  
The United States will continue to take a principled stand against the use of our technology  
to   support   China’s   military   and   its   technology-enabled   authoritarianism,   working   in  
conjunction with likeminded allies and partners.  In doing so, we will implement policies that  
keep pace with rapid technological change and PRC efforts to blend civil and military uses  
and compel companies to support China’s security and intelligence services.    
  
These efforts demonstrate United States commitment to the fundamental values and norms  
that have served as the foundation of the international system since the end of the Second  
World War.  While the United States has no desire to interfere in the PRC’s internal affairs,  
Washington   will   continue   to   be   candid   when   Beijing   strays   from   its   international  
commitments and responsible behavior, especially when United States interests are at stake.   
For  example,   the  United States   has   significant  interests   in  the  future   of  Hong  Kong.   
Approximately 85,000 United States citizens and more than 1,300 United States businesses  
reside  in  Hong  Kong.    The  President,  the  Vice  President,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  have  
repeatedly called on Beijing to honor the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and preserve  
Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy, rule of law, and democratic freedoms, which enable  
Hong Kong to remain a successful hub of international business and finance.   
  
The  United  States  is  expanding  its  role  as  an  Indo-Pacific  nation  that  promotes  free  
enterprise and democratic governance.    In  November  2019,  the  United  States, Japan,  and  
Australia launched the Blue Dot Network to promote transparently-financed, high quality  
infrastructure through private sector led development around the world, which will add to  
the  nearly  1 trillion  dollars  of  United  States  direct  investment  in  the  Indo-Pacific  region  
alone.  At the same time, the Department of State issued a detailed progress report on the  

                                                           15  

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

implementation         of   our   whole-of-government           strategy     for   the   Indo-Pacific      region:    
A Free and Open Indo -Pacific:  Advancing a Shared Vision.  
  
                                               Conclusion  
                                                            
The Administration’s approach to the PRC reflects a fundamental reevaluation of how the  
United States understands and responds to the leaders of the world’s most populous country  
and second largest national economy.  The United States recognizes the long-term strategic  
competition  between  our  two  systems.    Through  a  whole-of-government  approach  and  
guided  by  a  return  to  principled  realism,  as  articulated  by  the  NSS,  the  United States  
Government will continue to protect American interests and advance American influence.  At  
the   same     time,   we    remain     open    to   constructive,     results-oriented       engagement       and  
cooperation from China where our interests align.  We continue to engage with PRC leaders  
in a respectful yet clear-eyed manner, challenging Beijing to uphold its commitments.  

  
  

                                                        16  
